# Introduction to Computer Science and Programming Using Python

6.00.1x MIT

---

## Overview of Course

- Think _computationally_ - algorithmically like a computer scientist.

- Simply, mastering make computers to do what we want them to do.

## Topics to Cover

- Represent knowledge with _data structures_.

- _Iteration and Recursion_ as computational metaphors.

- _Abstraction_ of procedures and data types.

- _Organize and modularize_ systems using object classes and methods.

- Different classes of _algorithms_, searching and sorting.

- _Complexity_ of algorithms.

## What can a computer do?

Fundamentally, computers are good at two things: _calculations_ and
_remembering_ results.

What kind of calculations? Depends on the hardware, but mostly comes with
built-in instruction sets. Simplest instructions would include arithmetic
operations, and simple logical operations.

If these are all we had to work with, it would be painfully difficult to write
anything useful. So, one thing that we are trying to acheive is defining new
instructions or calculations or operations that we can create, abstract, and
treat it as primitive - give it to the computer to perform.

Simple calculations are not enough - even though computers can perform them
fast, we also need to approach it smartly so that we can reduce the complexity
and avoid brute force approaches. Hence, this outlines the importance of good
algorithm design (in terms of both time and space).

Even then, we will still reach our limit. Some problems are too complex. For
example, it simply is not possible to predict tomorrow's weather with absolute
certainty as it requires massive amount of data and computational power. But
complexity also works in our favor such as encryption in security.

Or, some problems are fundamentally impossible to compute (such as halting problem).

## Types of Knowledge

The function of computer is of course - to compute something. But in order to
do so, we need first define what _knowledge_ that we are using to define this
computation (or instructions).

There are two types of knowledge:

(1) declarative knowledge

- It is statements of fact.
- i.e. There is a card of value less than 10 in this deck of cards.
- In this case, we simply know there is a card with specified detail; but this
  does not tell us how to find it.

(2) imperative knowledge

- It is a "how-to" knowledge or sequential computation.
- i.e. First, shuffle the cards. Take a top card from the deck and check its
  value. If it is less than 10, continue to take from the top whilst discard
  previously drawn card.
- Process above lays out the sequence of instructions in order to perform the
  linear search for the card.

## A Numerical Example

A square root of a number `x` is `y` such that `y * y = x`.

Above is a statement of _fact_, and it does not tell us how to find the square
root - but it can be used to _check_ whether a guess is correct.

To _compute_ a square root, we would require a recipe to follow:

```
In order to find the square root of x,

(1) Start with a guess, g

(2) If g * g is close enough to x, then g is the answer

(3) Otherwise, make a new guess by averaging g and x / g

(4) Repeat the process using new guess until close enough

```

For example, to find the square root of 16, let us begin by a guess of 3.

```
3 * 3 = 9 which is not close to 16. We prepare a new guess by (3 + 16 / 3) / 2 which is 4.1667.

4.1667 * 4.1667 = 17.36 which is close, but not close enough to 16. New guess would be 4.0035.

And process repeats.

```

## What is a recipe?

Above example illustrates what a recipe is.

It is a sequence of simple steps, that involves a _flow of control_ to specify
when to execute each step as well as a mean to determine when to _stop_ the
process.

This is also known as _algorithm_.

