## Computer is a machine

There are ways to capture this recipe or algorithm.

(1) _fixed program_

- A simple calculator.

(2) _stored program_

- A machine stores and executes instructions.

- Load the sequence of instructions. Used to be punch cards.

## Basic Computer Architecture

Input/Output Devices

Memory

- Stores data as well as instructions.

ALU (Arithmetic Logic Unit)

- Performs basic primitive operations (add, subtract, logic ...).

Control Unit (Program Counter)

- Controls the flow.
- It keeps track of what instruction or operation to perform at any given
  moment in the ALU.
- Has a register called PC (program counter), which points to location of the
  currently running instruction in the memory.
- Basically tells where we are in the program.

## Stored Program Computer

- A sequence of instructions stored inside computer built from predefined set
  of primitive instructions:
    - Arithmetic/Logic
    - Simple boolean test
    - Moving data (set registers or memory)

- Special program (interpreter) executes each instruction in order.
    - Uses test to change flow of control through sequence.
    - Stop when it is done.

## Basic Primitives

Turing has proven that you can compute _anything_ with 6 primitives (Turing
Machine) - move left/move right/scan/read/write/do nothing. Obviously, this is
a painful way to write any meaningful program.

So, in modern programming languages, we have more convenient set of primitives
and as a programmer, we _can abstract methods to create new primitives_. Back
to the square root problem, we can define a method - abstract the process of
finding square root and treat it so that as if manufacture or someone already
have defined it for us, and use it elsewhere.

In short, a language is just as powerful as every other language - meaning,
anything computable in one language is computable in any other programming
langugage.

Of course, in some languages it is easier to do certain things. For example,
for manipulating matrix, MatLab would be good choice of language.

This is due to _turing completeness_.

---

## Creating Recipes

A programming language comes with a set of primitive _operations_.

_Expressions_ are complex but legal combinations of these primitives - and has
an associated _value_ which gives expression a meaning.

## Language is...

- Primitive Constructs
    - i.e. English has words.
    - Programming language has numbers, strings, simple operators.

- Syntax
    - For example, it is syntactically invalid to write "cat this bear". It is
      not a valid expression. It is missing a verb.
    - In programming language, we could write `5 * 5` and have interpreter
      understand what it would mean. But some expression such as `"hi"8/10"`
      would be illegal.

- Static Semantics
    - It refers to _syntactically valid strings_ that have meaning.
    - For example, "You is cats" is a syntactically valid string which follows
      noun + verb + adjective. However, it semantically does not make sense.
    - Same for programming language, `3 + "hi"` maybe is syntatically correct,
      but its evaluation is semantically wrong (what does it mean to add
      a number and a string?).

- Semantics
    - It is a meaning associated with a syntactically correct string of symbols
      with no static semantic errors.
    - In English, a syntactically correct and static semantically correct
      string can have ambigious meaning such as "Flying planes can be
      dangerous".
    - In programming language, we would have one meaning - but is it the
      meaning that programmer have intended?

## Where bugs and errors in languages come from?

- Syntactic errors
    - It is fairly common and can be easily caught.

- Static Semantica erors.
    - Some languages can check for these before execution (compile errors
      usually).
    - Can cause unpredicable behavior.

- No semantic errors but different meaning than what programmer intended.
    - Logical errors that are hard to catch.
    - Program will behave in unintended ways: may crash, runs forever, or gives
      wrong answers.


