## Programs (and Python)

A _program_ is a sequence of definitions and commands:

- _Definitions_ get evaluated.
- _Commands_ are executed (by an interpreter in case of Python).

Program can be typed directly or stored in a file that is read and evaluated.

## Objects

Programs maniulate _data objects_.

Every object has an associated _type_ that defines the kind of things that
program can do (i.e. type of string).

Objects are:

- Scalar (cannot be subdivided)

- Non-scalar (have internal structure that can be accessed)

## Scalar Objects (in Python)

```
int         represents integers (1, 93, ...)
float       represents real numbers (3.27, 4.0, ...)
bool        represents bollean values True and False
NoneType     special and has only one value, None
```

To find out a type of an object, we can use `type()`. For example, `type(5)`
would return `int`.

We can _convert_ types with _casting_.

```
float(3)        converts integer 3 into float 3.0
int(3.9)        truncates float 3.9 into integer 3
```

## Expressions

By combining objects and operators, we can form _expressions_.

An expression has a value (or evaluates to a value) which has a type.

Just like how simple English language has syntax of Noun + Verb + Adjective,
a simple expression has a simple syntax of

```
<object> + <operator> + <object>
```

## Operators on `int` and `float`

```
i + j           sum
i - j           difference
i * j           product
i / j           division (float result)
i // j          division (int result without remainder)
i % j           modulo (remainder)
i ** j          i to the power of j
```

We can combine with "()", parentheses to assign an operator precedence.
Operator precendence is similar to other languages where we have "**", "*", "/"
evaluated before "+", "-" and executed from left to right.

---

## Binding Variables and Values

"=" is an _assignment operator_ that gives value to a variable name.

```python
pi1 = 3.14
pi2 = 22 / 7
```

Here, value that is evaluated on the right hand side of the "=" gets stored in
a computer memory somewhere; and an assignment binds the name to the value.
Thus, when bound name is called, computer will look up and retrieve the
associated value from the memory.

This can be checked with `id()` function which will return the associated
memory address of a variable so that we can look up where in the memory that
the value is stored.

## Abstracting Expressions

With assignment, we can give names to an expression! By doing so, we can reuse
by names instead of the values.

```python
pi = 3.14
radius = 2.2
area = pi * (radius ** 2)
```

Of course, in simple cases as above, if it was a compiled language, the
compiler would see the expression and optimize it as the expression can be
evaluated right away (it is essentially a constant). But, we can now compute
the area of the _any_ given radius.

This also makes it easier to change the codes later - do not have to track down
the radius wherever it is used in the code; instead, just change the radius
assignment once at the beginning.

## Changing Bindings

We can re-bind variable names using new assignment statements. In this case,
previous value may still be stored in memory, but we now lost the pointer to
it. If language has a GC, it will remove it to free the memory.
