## Comparison Operators for `int` and `float`

Normal comparison operators all work which includes >, >=, <, <=.

We can also test for _equality_ with == and !=.

The equality test can be funny - remember whether you are using it to compare
the memory address or the value associated with at the memory address.

There are some weird cases in Python such as follows:

```python
i1 = 1
i2 = 1

i1 == i2
id(i1) == id(i2)
```

Both will evaluated to `True`. The last comparison of the memory addresses
maybe is unintuitive as we would think that `i1` and `i2` will have different
memory address - and stores value of `1` separately. This is an optimization
that Python does in the back end where interpreter will pre-store commonly used
integer values (from 1 to ?). This can be checked by performing `id(1)` which
will give same memory address as `id(i1)` and `id(i2)`. And when we move into
larger values, then Python will start to allocate new memory addresses.

```python
i1 = 123456789
i2 = 123456789

id(i1) == id(i2)        # evals to False
```

## Common Logic Operators on Boolean

Common logic operators are available to use in python which includes "not",
"and", "or". We can conjoin more than 2 boolean expressions to evaluate in
a single statement such as `a and b or c and d`.

## Brnaching Programs

Simplest form of branching statement is a conditional; using a test to see
whether it would evaluate to True or False; and depending on the result, we
execute a block of code separately.

```python
x = input("Enter your name: ")

if x == "John":
    # True block
    print(f"Hello, {x}!")
else:
    # False block
    print("Hello, stranger!")
```

Above simple example tests to see whether given user input is equal to String
"John". "If" it evals to True, the program print "Hello, John!"; otherwise,
"Hello, stranger!".

The conditionals can be nested:

```python
if x == "Fizz":
    if y == "Buzz":
        print("FizzBuzz")
    else:
        print("Fizz")
elif y == "Buzz":
    print("Buzz")
```

In Python, _indentation_ (either tab or spaces) indicates the blocks of code.

## String

String is a type that is comprised of letters, special characters, spaces and
digits that are enclosed in qutation marks or single quotes.

```python
str1 = "Hello, "
str2 = 'World!'
```

And there are many useful operations available in python which allows for
convenient manipulation of string.

```python
str3 = str1 + str2      # concatenation. str3 is "Hello, World!"
str4 = str2 * 2         # repeats same string. "World!World!"
len(str3)               # returns length of string. 13
str3[1]                 # list indexing works. "e"
str3[0:5]               # "Hello". same as str3[:5]
str3[:]                 # it is a "copy" of the str3
```

## I/O using `print`

`print` is what we use to output to the console.

`input` is what we use to take in user inputs in `str`. Remember to cast into
other types if we are expecting another type.


