## Control Flow using Loops

There are many ways to loop a particular segment or block of code.

```python
while True:
    # execute block here
```

`while` tests for condition, and while it remains True, the block of code will
be repeated. In the case of above, this would result in an _infinite_ loop as
we do not change the condition. The simple code below will run its block of
code 10 times - printing decreasing value from 10 to 1.

```python
x = 10
while x > 0:
    print(x)
    x -= 1
```

```python
for i in range(10):
    print(i)
```

`range(start, stop, step)` is an iterator function that returns the specified
range of values between (start, step] and incremented by the step amount.
Combined with `for`, this loop will print integer value from 0 to 9.

To exit from the loop or block of code to escape the scope, `break` statement
is used.

```python
while True:
    if x % 2 == 0:
        break
    # ...
```

Above code will infinitely run until `x` evaluates to be even number, which
case runs the `break` statement to finally escape from the `while` loop.

## Iterative Code

Branching structures using conditionals let us jump to different part of code
based on a boolean test - which runs in constant time always.

Looping structures let us repeat the part of the code until the condition is
met - hence, how long a program runs depends on values of the variables.

## Classes of Algorithsm

Iterative algorithms allows us for more complex tasks - leading to a new
classes of algorithms.

A simple example is "guess-and-check" methods, referring back to the square
root example.

## Guess and Check

In our previous declarative definition of the square root, we could guess
possible values for square root (let it be `g`) - then we can use definition of
the square root to check if `g * g == x`.

Now, the efficiency depends on how good we can generate our guesses.

## Finding Cube Root of Integer

One way to use this idea of generating guesses in order to find a cube root of
`x` is to first try `g` starting from value 0, 1, 2, ... until k such that
where `k ** 3 > x`.

This is better than complete random guess approach as there are only finite
number of guesses to try.

```python
x = int(input("Enter an integer: "))

result = 0

while result ** 0 < x:
    result += 1

if result ** 3 != x:
    print(f"{x} is not a perfect cube.")
else:
    print(f"Cube root of {x} is {result}")
```

## Loop Characteristics

In order to loop, we need to think about loop variable and decrementing
function. How is loop variable instantiated outside of loop and changes
throughout the loop? How do we terminate and how does it exactly decrements to
terminiate once goal is reached?

---

## Reviewing Strings

Strings are simply a sequence of case sensitive characters which can be
compared with operators and indexed like a list (or an array).

It is possible to _slice_ strings with `[start:stop:step]`.

Remeber that Strings are _immutable_ - once created, we cannot modify it;
hence, we need to create a new string in order to do so.

```python
s = "John"
s[0] = "D"          # error - cannot modify immutable string
s = "D" + s[1:]     # valid - creates new string using concat and slicing
```

## Strings and Loops

Knowing this, we can use String in our looping structure.

```python
s = input("Enter any string: ")

for i in range(len(s)):
    if s[i] == 'a':
        print("we have a in the given string!")

for char in s:
    if char == 'a':
        print(we have a in the given string!")
```

