## Dealing with Float

Let's examine how floating or real numbers are represented in the programs or
computers.

Floats are actually "approximations" to the real numbers - we cannot store
infinite number of digits.

Decimal number for example can be broken down as follows:

```
312 = 3 * 10^2 + 1 * 10^1 + 2 * 10^0
```

Same for binary number:

```
1001 = 1 * 2^3 + 1 * 2^0
```

We know that computers can only store information in binary format.

## Converting Decimal to Binary

By using modulo 2 of decimal x, we can find the last binary bit.

And we can perform right shft by 1 if we divide x by 2.

This is basic of how to convert any decimal to binary format.

## How does this work with fractions?

```
3/8 = 0.375 = 3 * 10^-1 + 7 * 10^-2 + 7 * 10^-3
```

So, trick here is to multiply by a power of 2 big enough to convert into
a whole number, which can be converted to binary and then divide by the same
power of 2.

```
0.375 * (2 ** 3) = 3 (decimal)
3 (decimal) = 11 (binary)
Divide by 2**3 (shift right) to get 0.011 (binary)
```

## Implications

If there is no integer p such that x * (2 ** p) is a whole number, then
internal representation of x has to be approximation.

This means that testing eqaulity of floats is not exact.

Python does automatic rounding.

---

## Newton-Raphson Method

General approximation algorithm to find roots of a polynomial in one variable.
For example, given a polynomial p(x), we want to find r such that p(r) = 0.

This ties into the finding square root problem as to find the square root of
some number y, we are then solving `p(x) = x^2 - y`.

Newton had shown that if g is an approximation to the root, then

```
g - p(g) / p`(g)
```

makes for a better approxmiation where \`p is derivative of p.

Let's think of simple case where `cx^2 + k`.

It's derivative is `2cx`, hence simple polynomial such as `x^2 + k` would have
derivative of `2x`.

So, Newton-Raphson method will provide a better way to generate next guess by

```
g - (g^2 - k) / 2 * g
```

---

## Thus far, we have seen iterative algorithms

Guess and chekc methods build on reusing same code - using loop construct to
generate guesses (or improve on previous one), check and then continue if
result is not found yet.

We have seen three methods for generating guesses - exhastive enumeration
(brute force), bisection search (logrithmic), and Newton-Raphson.


