# Decomposition, Abstraction, Functions

## How do we write code?

So far, we have written in following fashion:

- Covered basics of language mechanisms.
- Learned how to write different files for each computation.
- Each file is some piece of code where each code is a sequence of
  instructions.

This leads to several problems:

- It is not scalable for larger problems.
- Hard to keep track of details.

## Good Programming Practice

Writing more code is not necessarily a good thing - measure of a good
programmer is by the amount of functionality - _functions_.

With _functions_, we can achieve _decomposition_ and _abstraction_.

## Analogy of BlackBox

Think of function as a "Black Box".

We do not know how it works but we know what to feed into (input) and what
comes out (output).

In order to use this "Black Box", we do not need to know the inner workings of
this mysterious box - this is the idea of _abstraction_. Think in terms of
contract, box is guranteed to give you a correct output for same input every
time with predictable outcome.

_Decomposition_ simply means that many boxes can work together to acheive
a common goal.

## In practice...

- Decomposition

    - Break problem into different, self-contained pieces

- Abstraction

    - Suppress details of method to compute something from use of that
      computation.

## Create "structure" using decomposition

In programming, divide code into _modules_ which are:

- self-contained
- used to break up code
- intended to be reusable
- maintain clean, coherent, organized code base

One main method for achieving decomposition is using _functions_ - and later on
using _classes_.

## Hiding "details" with abstraction

Think of a piece of code as a black box - we cannot see the details, but we
know what to put in and what to expect. We do not need to care about what goes
inside.

---

## Functions

We utilize functions to take advantage of abstraction and decomposition.

Functions are not run in a program until they are _invoked_.

It has following characteristics:

- Has an associated name.
- Has parameters (0 or more).
- Has an optional doc string that describes what the function does.
- Has a body.

In Python, functions is written with `def` keyword:

```python
def isEven(num):
    return num % 2 == 0

isEven(10)
```

## Variable Scope

_Formal parameter_ gets bound to the value of _actual parameter_ when function
is called; in fact, whenever function is called, we create a new
scope/frame/environment. Here, _scope_ refers to mapping of names to the
objects.

```python
def f(x):
    x += 1
    return x

x = -3
z = f(x)
print(x, z)     # prints -3, -2
```

In above example, we see that x is defined both inside and outside of the
function. The value of x inside the function is independent of the x outside of
the function as it is in different scope. We can use `nonlocal` to let python
know that if the name binding cannot be found in current scope, then look at
one level above.

What happens above is that we have a global scope that maintains three name
spaces which are `f`, `x`, and `z` - yes, it also treats `f` as an object to
remember as python treats functions as first classs citizens. Soon as function
`f` is called, we create a new scope where it maintains a seperate name space
of `x` which is independent of global scope. Hence, modifying `x` within the
function only changes the `x` of that function scope, and will not effect `x`
on the global scope at all.

Function can access a variable defined outside but cannot modify variables
defined outside (unboundlocalerror).


