## Specifications

A _contract_ between the implementer of a function and the clients who will use
it (think in terms of `interfaces` in Java):

- _Assumptions_: conditions that must be met by clients of the function;
  typically constraints on values of parameters.

- _Gurantees_: conditions that must be met by function, providing it has been
  called in manner consistent with assumptions.

```python
def isEven(num):
    """
    Input:  
        num, a positive integer

    Returns True if num is even; otherwise, False
    """
    return num % 2 == 0
```

## What is Recursion?

A way to design solutions to problems by _divide-and-conquer_ or
_decrease-and-conquer_.

Recursion refers to where a function calls itself - this may sound like
a recipe for creating an infinite loop but it is not.

- Must have 1 or more base cases which we can test for and escape the
  recursion.

- Must solve the same problem on some other input with the goal of simplifying
  the larger problem input.

## Compared to Iterative Algorithms

Looping constructs (`while` and `for` loops) have been used to create iterative
algorithms.

It can capture computation in a set of _state variables_ that update on each
iteration through loop (i.e. have a counter variable, or flag).

## Multiplication Example - in itertaive approach

If we are told to implement multiplication without using `*` operator, then we
can think of `x * y` as simply adding `x` to itself `y` amount of times.

```python
def multIter(x, y):
    result = 0
    while y > 0:
        result += a
        y -= 1
    return result
```

## Multiplication Example - in recursive approach

_Recursive step_ involves thinking about how to reduce problem to
a _simpler/smaller_ version of same problem.

_Base case_ is reached when we keep reducing problem until reach a simple case
that can be solved immediately.

In this multiplication case, our base case would be when we have reached `y`
equals 1 in which we return `x * y = x`.

```python
def multiRecur(x, y):
    if y == 1:
        return x
    return x + multiRecur(x, y - 1)
```

## Factiorial Example

Factorial is defined as:

```
n! = n * (n - 1) * (n - 2) * ... * 1
```

How would we reduce the problem? How do we reach the simple base case?

```python
def factRecur(n):
    if n == 1:
        return 1
    return n * factRecur(n - 1)
```

## Observations on Recursive Approach

Each recursive call to a function has its own scope/environment which is not
surprsing as it is treated as a function call.

Binding of variables in a scope is not changed by recursive call - i.e.
variables in the scope of call to `factRecur(4)` does not interfere with
varaibles in the scope of call to `factRecur(3)`.

Flow of control passes back to _previous scope_ once function call returns
value.

Recursion maybe is much simpler and intuitive to use - however, it can be
expensive and not so efficient from computer's perspective.

## Induction Reasoning

It is a process of finding proof - in this case, how do we gurantee that our
function will work?

In the case of `multiIter`, we see that it will terminate given y is initially
positive and decreases by 1 each time around loop - hence, it will eventually
reach a state where y is less than 1.

In the case of `multiRecur`, we have two cases: either y is 1 or greater. If
y is 1, then we do not have to make further recursive calls and stops. If y is
greater than 1, then we see that we would make further recursive call whilst
reducing the y by 1; hence, y would gradually reach 1 where it will stop.

## Mathmatical Induction

To prove a statement indexed on integers is True for all values of n:

- Prove it is true when n is smallest possible value (i.e. n = 0 or n = 1);
  there can be multiple of such cases (i.e. fib).

- Then, prove that if it is true for an arbitary value of n, one can show that
  it must be True for n + 1.

## Example of Induction

```
0 + 1 + 2 + ... + n = (n * (n + 1)) / 2
```

How do we prove above Gauss' formula?

Proof:

```
Let n = 0. Then, following holds:

0 + 0 = 0 * (0 + 1) / 2
0 = 0

So, it must be true for n = 0.

---

Assume it is True for some positive integer K, then need to show following:

0 + 1 + 2 + ... + k + (k + 1) = ((k + 1) * (k + 1 + 1)) / 2

Since we have our assumption to be True, LHS can be reduced to 

0 + 1 + 2 + ... + k + (k + 1) = (k * (k + 1)) / 2 + (k + 1)

Above will be reduce to

((k + 1) * (k + 2)) / 2

and this is same as our RHS that we were trying to show.
```

## How does induction work in code?

Let's go back to the `multiRecur` example.

We first show that the code works for our base case. Here, we assume y to be
1 and it shows that when y is 1, we would return x which is True.

Then, we assume that `multiRecur` is to be True and returns correct result for
problems of size smaller than y. Then, by addition step, it must also return
a correct answer for problem of size y.

