# Tuples, Lists, Mutability, Cloning

Compund data complex.

## Tuples

An ordered sequence of elements with mixed types.

It is _immutable_ - once it is made, it cannot change its contents.

```python
tuple1 = ()
tuple2 = ("two", 1, 3.13)
tuple2[0]                   # is "two"
tuple3 = tuple2 + (5, 6)    # is ("two", 1, 3.13, 5, 6)
tuple3[1:3]                 # is (1, 3.13)

tuple3[0] = "three"         # error; tuple is immutable
```

Note the following:

```python
tuple1 = ("one")            # tuple1 is actually "one"; not tuple
tuple2 = ("two",)           # tuple2 is now a tuple ("two")
```

Tuples gives a nice way to swap two (or more) variables at once, changing their
orders in a single line without having to assign a temporary variable to hold
the swapped values:

```python
x, y = y, x
```

Also, it can be used to return multiple values from a function.

Tuple is _iterable_ and can be nested.

```python
tuple1 = ( ("one"), ("two", 2, 3), ("three", 4, 5, 6) )

for t in tuple1:
    for element in t:
        print(element)
```

## Lists

It is an _ordered sequence_ of information, accessible by index.

A list is denoted by square brackets, `[]`.

A list contains elements: usually is homogeneous, but can contain mixed types.

A list is _mutable_ unlike tuple is.

It can be indexed where index itself can be an expression.

### Common Operations on Lists

```python
li = []

li.append(1)        # [1]
li.append(2)        # [1, 2]
```

How does this work? Everything in Python is an object - which means that list
is also an object and is treated as such:

- Objects have data (list elements in this case)
- Objects have methods and functions (here, `append` is one such function)

There are many useful operations such as `sort`, `sorted`, `reverse` and much
more which can be found in offical python documentation.

## Mutation, Aliasing, Cloning

### Lists in memory

List is an _mutable object_, hence it resides in memory where bound varaible
name points the that list object.

Any variables that are pointing at that object will be affected - meaning that
there will be side effects when dealing with mutable object such as list. i.e.
if we change the list from one variable, others will also change.

Think of it as a person having many different nick names - they all refer to
actual one actual person.

This also has affect on the equality testing with `==` operator. By default,
this checks the equality of the memory locations - not the contents! Hence,
even if we have two separately generated lists with same exact values, `==`
will return False. We would need to override or write our own way for testing
the logical equality if needed.

### Cloning a list

Cloning a list is a process of _creating a new list_ and _copying every
element_ in the list.

Know the difference between shallow copying and deep copying (in particular
`copy` module and `copy.deepcopy()` function).




