# Functions as Objects; Dictionaries

## Functions are objects in Python

In some programming languages, functions are treated as a _first class
objects_:

- it has types
- can be elements of data structures (i.e. lists)
- can appear within expressions
    - part of an assignment
    - can be passed as an argument to another function

This enables _higher order programming_.

```python
def doForEach(li, func):
    """
    Given li as an iterable list and func as a function, doForEach() mutates
    the given li by replacing each element e from li with func(e).
    """
    for i in range(len(li)):
        li[i] = func(li[i])

def multByTwo(num):
    return num * 2

li = [1, 2, 3]
doForEach(li, multByTwo)
```

Above example shows the usage of function as a first class citizen: because it
is an object like anyother, we can freely pass to another function. This is
essentially what `map()` does.

Then it is not surprising to see functions in a collections:

```python
def applyAll(li, num):
    result = num
    for func in li:
        result = func(result)
    return result

result = applyAll( [abs, int, multByTwo], 16 )
```

## Generalization of HOPS

This is what we would call higher order procedures, or HOP. And Python offers
a general purpose HOP, `map()`.

Simple form: 

- `map()` accepts a unary function and a collection of suitable arguments.
- Then, it returns an _iterable_ so that we can see the result one by one. This
  is different from what we did above in `doForEach()` where it mutated the
  original list; not the case with `map()`.

General form:

- We can also apply to an n-ary function and n collections of arguments.

```python
l1 = [1, -10, 20]
l2 = [99, 9, 1]
for res in map(min, l1, l2):
    print(res)
```

Above function will go find minimum for paired tuples from each list.

---

## Strings, Tuples, Ranges, Lists

Common Operations:

- `seq[i]` indexing
- `len(seq)` length of sequence
- `seq1  seq2` concatenation
- `n * seq` returns a sequence that is seq repeated n times
- `seq[start:end]` returns slice of seq from start to end
- `e in seq` True if e is in seq else False
- `for e in seq` iterates over elements of sequence

Note that only the list is mutable!

---

## Dictionaries

HashMap structure that shares some similarities with list.

List has index and element - and element is accessed with index. Index may only
be integer.

Dictionary has key - value pair; and key acts as a custom index by label to
access the value.

- Keys
    - Has to be unique
    - Has to be _immutable_ type (and also has to be _hashable_ meaning that if
      key is an object, it should be immutable and implements `__hash__()`.
    - Be careful when using `float` as a key

- Values
    - Can be any type
    - Can be duplicates
    - Can be other objects or containers (i.e. dictionary of lists or other
      dicts)

There is no order to the dictionary - we can iterate over it, but it will
return different order everytime. To enforce order, we have to implement our
selves by maintaining the order of the keys in doubly linked list or use
`OrderedDict` from collections library.

```python
d = dict()

for e in seq:
    d[e] = d.getdefault(e, 0) + 1
```

Above will count occurrence of element in the seq - much like what `Counter`
does from collection library.

Dictionary is efficient structure to utilize when we want to look up our key
values in constant time.

```python
def fibRecur(n):
    if n == 1 or n == 2:
        return n
    return fibRecur(n - 1) + fibRecur(n - 2)
```

Recursive solution to fib above is extremely in efficient. There are duplicate
works being done which we already know the answers of (i.e. `fibRecur(3),
fibRecur(2), ...`). Hence, we can _cache_ this result into dictionary such that
we can effectively reduce our time - to linear.

```python
def fibRecurFixed(n, memo):
    if n in memo:
        return memo[n]
    result = fibRecurFixed(n - 1, memo) + fibRecurFixed(n - 2, memo)
    memo[n] = result
    return result

fibRecurFixed(5, {1:1, 2:2})
```

We can also use tools from functools library:

```python
from functools import lru_cache

@lru_cache(None)
def fibRecurBetter(n):
    if n in {1, 2}:
        return n
    return fibRecurBetter(n-1) + fibRecurBetter(n-2)
```

