# Chapter 1. Getting Started

## 1.1 Writing a Simple C++ Program

```cpp
int main()
{
    return 0;
}
```

Every program contains one or more functions with one of them being `main`.
This is the entry point and what OS will try to run the given C++ program.

Function consists of four elements: a *return type*, a *function name*,
a *parameter list*, and a *function body*. `main` is a special case, but
is defined same way.

Note that `main` has a empty list of parameters and has return type of `int`
zero. Here, `int` is a *built-in type* which the language defines for us.

Final part of the main function has the function body, which is a block of
statements surrounded by the curly braces.

Only statement in the main function is a `return` statement, which terminates
the function. Also, `return` can also be used to send a value back to the
function's caller. When a `return` statement includes a value, the value
returned must have a type that is compatible with the return type of the
function. In this case, `int` is expected.

Note that on most systems, the value returned from the `main` is indicator of
a status - return value of `0` implies success whereas any other value
specifies some sort of error.

### 1.1.1 Compiling and Executing Our Program

Compiling a program depends upon the system and the compiler used. Most
compilers expect program source code to be stored in one or more files called
*source files*. Typically, these files will end in suffixes `.cc`, `.cxx`,
`.cpp`, `.c` and so on.

Typical compiling command used in UNIX like systems will be `cc`:

```
$ cc program1.cpp
```

Or, with `g++`:

```
$ g++ program1.cpp -o program1
```

Source code named `program1.cpp` will compile into a exectuable named
`program1` or `a.out`. 

## 1.2 A First Look at Input/Output

C++ does not define any statements to do IO - instead it uses *standard
library* to provide IO. For example, `iostream` library. A stream is a sequence
of characters read from or written to an IO device.

Library defines four IO objects. To handle input, we use an object of type
`istream` named `cin` is used which is also referred to as `stdin`. To handle
output, `ostream` object named `cout` is used which is also referred to as
`stdout`. Library also defines two other `ostream` objects `cerr` and `clog`
which is used for `stderr` and logging respectively.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    std::cout << "Enter two numbers:" << std::endl;

    int num1 = 0, num2 = 0;
    std::cin >> num1 >> num2;
    
    std::cout   << "Sum of two numbers" 
                << num1 << " and " << num2 << " is " 
                << num1 + num2 << std::endl;

    return 0;
}
```

Here, first line is a directive that tells the compiler we wish to use
`iostream` library which provides IO utilities. The name inside the `<...>`
refers to as *header* or *header* file which usually ends in `.h`. 

To write to a stream, we see the `<<` output operator. This operator takes in
two operaands: left operand must be an `ostream` object and right operand is
a value to be printed. The first statement can be broken down further.

```cpp
std::cout << "Enter two numbers:";
std::cout << std::endl;
```

Here, `std::endl` is a special value called a manipulator; it has an effect of
flushing the *buffer* associated with that device. By flushing, we ensure that
all the output the program has generated so far is actually writen to the
output stream, rather tha nsitting in memory waiting to be written.

Note, when debugging, it is common practice to write a log statement or print
statement to see the status of the program. If so, we should always flush the
stream as when program unexpectedly crashes, the output maybe left in the
buffer or memory.

To use names from the standard libarary, we notice that we write `std::cout`
and `std::endl` rather than simply `cout` and `endl`. The prefix `std::`
indicates that these names come from the *namespace* of `std`. By doing so, we
avoid conflict of duplicated names across the files and libraries. Here, `::`
is called *scope operator*.

## 1.3 A Word about Comments

Commnets are handled in C++ in single-line and paired.

`//` a double slash marks the line as a comment.

`/*` and `*/` marks the area surrounded as a comment.

## 1.4 Flow of Control

### 1.4.1 The `while` Statement

`while` statement repeats the section of the code so long as it is true.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

using namespace std;

int main()
{
    int x = 10, sum = 0;

    while (x-- > 0)
        sum += x;

    cout << "Sum is " << sum << endl;

    return 0;
}
```

### 1.4.2 The `for` Statement

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    int result = 0;

    for (int i = 1; i <= 10; i++)
        result += i;

    cout << result << endl;

    return 0;
}
```

### 1.4.3 Reading an Unknown Number of Inputs

```cpp
#include <iostream>

using namespace std;

int main()
{
    int result = 0, x = 0;

    while (std::cin >> x)
        result += x;

    cout << result << endl;

    return 0;
}
```

The state of the `istream` is tested within the while loop here. If the stream
is valid (no error is encountered), it would return True. Otherwise, it becomes
invalid in the case where *end-of-file* character or invalid input has been
encountered (such as reading a non-integer value). In such cases, test will
return False.

Note that you can enter end-of-file via `c z` in windows and `c d` in UNIX.

### 1.4.4 The `if` Statement

```cpp
#include <iostream>

using namespace std;

int main()
{
    int result = 0, x = 0;

    while (cin >> x)
        if (x % 2 == 0)
            result += x;
    
    cout << "Sum of even inputs are " << result << endl;

    return 0;
}
```
## 1.5 Introducing Classes

A *class* is used to define a data structure to represent our data. A class
defines a type along with a collection of operations that are related.

This is the primary focus of C++ where it makes possible to define *class
types* that behave as naturally as the built-in types and enable OOP.

A class requires three components:

- What is its name?
- Where is it defined?
- What operations does it support?

Suppose that we have a `Car` class that is already defined with in a header
`Car.h`.

If we wish to use this class, we have to include it in our code. Simply, we use
headers to access classes defined for our own applications. Header files are
conventionally named with a suffix of `.h`. Note that standard library
typically have no suffix. Compilers will not care but some IDE may do.

### 1.5.1 The `Car` Class

The purpose the this class would be to represent what a automobile should be.
It should have many attributes associated with it to differenciate one car
object from another.

```cpp
Car car1;
```

Every class defines a *type*. The type name is the same as the name of the
class; so, `Car` class defines a type of `Car` unsurprisingly. Above, we see
that `car1` is an object of type `Car`. In addition of defining a variable of
a type `Car`, we can also:

- Call a function defined in `Car`. For example, fetch the license number.
- Use `>>` input operator and `<<` output operator to read nwrite objects of
  type `Car`.
- Use the assignment operator `=` to assign one `Car` object to another.
- And so on.

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include "Car.h"

using namespace std;

int main()
{
    Car car1;
    // read License Number, Model, and price
    cin >> car1;
    // print car1 details: License Number, Model, price
    cout << car1 << endl;
    return 0;
}
```

So, if we have an input such as

```
1234567890 FairLady-Z 1000
```

Then, we would get an output such as

```
License Number: 1234567890
Model: FairLady-Z
Price: $1000
```

We could also define how the operators would behave when used on `Car` type
objects. For example, we could add up price of two cars when we `+` them
together.

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include "Car.h"

using namespace std;

int main()
{
    Car car1, car2;

    cin >> car1 >> car2;
    cout << car1 + car2 << endl;

    return 0;
}
```

So, when we input following:

```
123456789 FD3S 12000
987654321 AE85 7500
```

We get following output:

```
19500
```

### 1.5.2 Member Functions

We should try to check whether two Car objects have same license plate number
before we can add their price up together. To access the license plate number
information, we would do following:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include "Car.h"

int main()
{
    Car car1, car2;
    cin >> car1 >> car2;

    if (car1.id() != car2.id()) {
        cout << car1 + car2 << endl;
        return 0;
    } else {
        cout << "Same car cannot have different price to add up."
        return -1;
    }
}
```

Here, a *member function* `id()` is called - it is defined within a class that
is also referred to as *methods*. `.` dot operator denotes that `id` belongs
within that class.

To call the function or method, `()` call operator is used - it can enclose
empty or list of arguments that can be pass unto the methods. In this example,
`id()` accepts empty list of arguments.

## Chapter 1 Summary

### Terms

- argument: value passed to a function
- assignment: obliterates an object's current value and replace with new one.
- buffer: a region of storage to hold data.
- built-in type: type that is natively supported by the language (such as
  `int`).
- namespace: mechanism for putting names defined by a library into a single
  place. It helps to avoid same name collision.
- uninitialized variable: variable without initial given value; it would be an
  error to try to use a value of an uninitialized variable.

---
