# Chapter 2. Variables and Basic Types

## 2.1 Primitive Built-in Types

C++ defines a set of primitive types that include the *arithmetic types* and
a special type, `void`.

### 2.1.1 Arithmetic Types

It divides into two categories: *integral types* and floating-point types. The
size of the types vary across machines but minimum gurantee'd sizes are as
follows:

```
bool            boolean                     N/A
char            character                   8 bits
wchar_t         wide char                   16 bits
char16_t        unicode char                16 bits
char32_t        unicode char                32 bits
short           short int                   16 bits
int             integer                     16 bits
long            long int                    32 bits
long long       long int                    64 bits
float           single-precision float      6 sig-fig
double          double-precision float      10 sig-fig
long double     extended                    10 sig-fig
```

Note that at machine level, data is all stored as a sequence of binary digits.
Hence, we allocate chunks (in bits) of addressable memory location to be used
as a storage. This is grouped in bytes - or word. In C++, a byte has at least
as many bits as are needed to hold a character in the machine's basic character
set - a byte consists of 8 bits and a word is either 32 or 64 bits (4 or
8 bytes).

Most chip set will associate a number or an *address* with each byte in the
memory. For example, on a machine with 8-bit bytes and 4 byte word size, the
memory can be mapped as follows:

```
...
881234      0 0 1 1 1 0 1 1
881235      0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1
881236      0 1 1 1 0 0 0 1
881237      0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1
...

```

Hence, we can refer to what is stored at address "881234" - in this context, we
can find the word (8 bits) that are stored in the memory location "881234". If
we have a variable of type float, and float defined on this machine is in 32
bits, then we see that from "881234", it will require memory range "881234"
~ "881237" inclusive.

Exception of type `bool` and extended character types, the integral types must
deal with signs - hence, they can be either `signed` or `unsinged`. This is
because signed types will require using one bit to store its sign. Thus, while
signed types can represent negative values, its range is limited. For example,
unsigned int which represents 16-bits can store integral value of range (0,
2^16). However, singed int can represent integral value of range (-2^15,
2^15 - 1).

### 2.1.2 Type Conversions

The types of an object defines the data that an object might contain and what
operations are permited. One of such operation is conversion of types.

Type conversion happen automatically when we use an object of one type where an
object of another type is *expected*.

```cpp
bool b = 42;            // b is true
int i = b;              // i has a value of 1
i = 3.14;               // i has a value of 3
double pi = i;          // pi has a value of 3.0
unsigned char c = -1;   // assume 8 bit char, c has a value of 255
signed char c2 = 256;   // assume 8 bit char, c2 has a value of undefined
```

The outcome depends on the range of values that the type allows:

- When non-boolean arithmetic type is assigned to `bool`, result is `false` if
  value is 0; `true` otherwise.

- When a `bool` is assigned to arithmetic types, 1 is assigned if `true`;
  0 otherwise.

- When we assign floating-point value to an integral type, value is truncated.

- When we assign an integral value to an object of float, the fractional part
  will be set to zero. Precision can be lost.

- When we assign out of range value to an object of `unsigned` type, the result
  is remained of the value modulo the number of values the target type can
  hold.

- Above behavior will be undefined for `signed` type.

Note that theses undefined and implementation defined behavor is a cause of
many bugs - size limit of these types vary from machine to machine. And we
could make the program *nonportable* if we are not careful. 

Since the type conversions are applied automatically by the compiler if they
are expected to happen, we can use one in place of another. For example,

```cpp

int i = 1;

if (i) {
    // do something
}
```

Above will excute as it should as integer `i` is converted to `bool` true.

**Unsigned Types**

```cpp
unsigned u = 10;
int i = -10;
i + i;              // evals to -84
u + i;              // if 32-bit int, evals 4294967264
```

In the second expression, the negative `i` would be converted to `unsigned`
type before the addition is done - hence, the negative value causes underflow
to wrap around.

Hence, when we perform subtraction involving unsigned values, we should also
make sure the the result stays positive. Otherwise, the result will also
wrap-around.

This has a problem such as follows:

```cpp
for (int i = 10; i >= 0; i--) {
    // do something
}
```

To save space, we may think that we could replace `int` with `unsigned`;
however, doing so will create an infinite loop. Let's consider when unsigned
`i` is used and it reaches 0. We would subtract one from zero, creating
a negative value. However, negative value cannot fit into unsigned type, hence,
it would wrap around. In case of 32-bit int, -1 will warp around to (2^32 - 1)
or 4294967295.

In short, do not mix unsigned types with signed ones.

### 2.1.3 Literals

Actual value such as `111` is called `literal` as it is a value unto itself and
every literal is a type.

```
100     // decimal
010     // octal
0x12    // hexadecimal
```

Integer literals begin with 0 is considered as a octal and 0x (or 0X) is
hexadecimal.

By default, decimal literals are signed whereas octal and hexadecimal literals
can be either signed or unsigned.

```
'a'     // character literal
"ABC"   // string literal
```

A single charcter enclosed by a single quotes is a type of `char`; zero or more
characters enclosed by a double quotes is a type of `string` literal.

Note that the type of a string literal is an *array* of constant `char`s. The
compiler will automaticlly add a null char (`\0`) to every string literal.
Hence, the size of the string literal will always be one more than what it
appears to be. So, 'A' will be size of 1 as it is a character literal, but "A"
will have a size of 2 as it is a string literal that includes null character.

**Escape Sequences**

Some characters are non-printable and have a special meaning - used with
backlash.

```
\n      newline                 \a      alert
\t      horizontal tab          \b      backspace
\v      vertical tab            \\      backlash
\"      double quote            \'      single quote
\r      return
```

Also, generalized escape sequence is also possible in the form of `\x` where
x is one or more hex digits or octal digits.

## 2.2 Variables

*Variables* are named storages and every variable has an associated type which
allows program to determine the size of the storage required. Also, type
specifies its layout of memory, range of values and set of operations. It is
also known as *objects* and used interchangeably.

### 2.2.1 Variable Definitions

A variable definition consists of a *type specifier*, followed by a list of one
or more variable names separated by commas ending with a semicolon. Each name
in the lis thas the type defined by the type specifier.

```cpp
// sum, value, and units_sold are of type int
// sum and units_sold are initialized to value of 0
int sum = 0, value, units_sold = 0;

// item is of a type Item
Item item;

// car initailized from string literal
std::string car("Nissan Z");
```

Here, `std::string` is a type defined in the namespace `std`.

**Initializers**

An initialized object gets the specified value at the moment of its creation.
The value used to initialize a variable can be arbitrarily complicated
expressions. When a definition defines two or more variables, the name of each
object becomes visible immediately.

```cpp
// allowed; price is defined and initalized before used
double price = 99.99, discount = price * 0.5;

// allowed; function will be called and its return value will be used to initalize
double salePrice = applyDiscount(price, discount);
```

**List Initialization**

```cpp
int units_sold = 0;
int units_sold = {0};
int units_sold{0};
int units_sold(0);

long double ld = 3.1415;

// following is error; narrowing conversion required
int a{ld}, b = {ld};

// follwing is accepted but truncated
int c(ld), d = ld;
```

**Default Initialization**

By defining a variable without an initializer, the variable is default
initialized - and will be given a default value which depends upon the type of
the variable and where it is defined.

### 2.2.2 Variable Declarations and Definitions

Seperate compilation allows us to split source code into several files which
can be compiled independently and attached together.

One example that we have seen where code is shared amongst across multiple
files is usage of standard library.

`std::cout` or `std::endl` objects are defined somewhere in the standard
library, but our programs can use it seamlessly.

To allow for this, C++ separates *declarations* and *definitions*.

A **declaration** makes a name known to the program; a file that wants to use
a name defined elsewhere includes a declarations for that name.

A **definition** is what creates that associated entity.

A variable declaration specifies the type and name of a variable. A variable
definition is a declaration. In addition to specifying the name and type,
a definition also allocates storage and may provide the variable with an
initial value.

To obtain a declaration that is not also a definition, we add the `extern`
keyword to defer definition:

```cpp
extern int i;           // declared i, but not define what i is
int j;                  // j is declared and defined
```

We can also define a variable defined as `extern` - but doing so will override
the `extern`.

Note that variable can only be defined exactly once - but declared many times.
This is due to nature of *static typing* of C++, where types of each variables
are checked on compile time.

### 2.2.3 Identifiers

**Identifiers** can be composed of letters, digits and underscore character
which are not **keywords** reserved by the language itself.

### 2.2.4 Scope of a Name

A **scope** in most cases are delimited by curly braces.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

using namespace std;

int main()
{
    int result = 0;

    for (int i = 1; i <= 10; i++)
        result += i;

    cout << result << endl;

    return 0;
}
```

Above, we see different names defined throughout - `main`, `result`, and `i`;
and uses namespace name `std` and borrows `cout` and `endl`.

The name `main` is defined outside of the curly braces - hence, it is defined
outside of the function and has **glocal scope**. Once declared, names at the
global scope are accessible throughout the program.

The name `result` is defined within the scope of the block - body of `main`
function. It is accessible from its point of declaration throughout the rest of
the `main` function but not outside. Hence, it is said to have a **block
scope**.

The name `i` is defined within the scope of `for` loop statement.

**Nested Scopes**

Scopes can contain other scopes; *inner* and *outer* scopes.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

using namespace std;

int SOME_CONSTANT = 100;

int main()
{
    // i has a block scope
    int i = 0;
    
    // prints "100 0"
    cout << SOME_CONSTANT << " " << i << endl;
    
    // new local object will mask over global variable SOME_CONSTANT
    int SOME_CONSTANT = 999;
    
    // prints "999 0"
    cout << SOME_CONSTANT << " " << i << endl;

    // now, this explicitly will use global scoped SOME_CONSTANT
    // prints "100 0"
    cout << ::SOME_CONSTANT << " " << i << endl;


    return 0;
}
```

Note that it is always a bad idea to reuse the same name for global and
function variables.

## 2.3 Compound Types

A *compound type* refers to type that is defined in terms of another type.
There are several compound types in C++ which are *references* and *pointers*.

A declaration is a **base type** followed by a list of declarators.

### 2.3.1 References

Note that new standard introduced a new kind of reference: an "rvalue
reference". These are intended for use inside the classes - technicially, when
we use the **term** reference, it refers to "lvalue reference".

A **reference** defines an alternative name for an object - it "refers to"
another type.

```cpp
int ival = 10;              
int &refVal = ival;     // refVal refers to ival (is another name for ival)
int &refVal2;           // error; a reference is incomplete; uninitialized.
```

When a variable is initialized, the value of the initializer will also be
copied into the object we are creating. In the case of references, instead of
copying the content, we **bind** the reference to its initializer. A reference
will remain bound to its initial object and *no way to rebind* a reference to
another object. This implies that every reference **must** be initalized.

**Think of Reference As An Alias**

Reference is not an object! It is simply another name!

After a reference has been defined, all operations on that reference are
actually operations on the *same* object to which the reference is bound.

```cpp
refVal = 2;             // assigns 2 to ival which refVal is bound to
int ival2 = refVal;     // same as ival2 = ival
```

When we assign to a reference, we are assigning to the object to which the
reference is bound. When we fetch the value of a reference, we are really
fetching the value of the object to which the reference is bound. Similarly,
when we use a reference as an initializer, we are really using the object to
which the reference is bound:

```cpp
// allowed; refVal3 is bound to the object which refVal is bound to; ival
int &refVal3 = refVal;

// initializes i from the value in the object to which refVal is bound
// i will be same as ival
int i = refVal;
```

*As references are not objects, there is no reference to reference*.

**Reference Definitions**

we can define references in a single definition; each identifier that is
reference must be preceded by the `&`:

```cpp
int i = 1, i2 = 2;
int &r = i, r2 = i2;        // r is reference to i; r2 is reference to i2
int i3 = 1, &ri = i3;       // i3 is an int; ri is reference to i3
int &r3 = i3, &r4 = i2;     // both r3 and r4 are references

int &refVal4 = 10;          // error; initalizer must be an object (not literal)
double dval = 3.14;
int &refVal5 = dval;        // error; initalizer must be an int object
```

### 2.3.2 Pointers

A **pointer** is a compound type that "points to" another type. Like
references, pointers are used for indirect access to other objects. However,
unlike references, a pointer is an object in its own right. It can be assigned
and copied. A single pointer can point to several different objects in its
lifetime. Unlike reference, a pointer need not be initialized at its
definition.

```cpp
int *ip1, ip2;      // ip1 and ip2 are pointers to int type
doube dp, *dp2;     // dp2 is a point to double; dp is double
```

**Taking the Address of an Object**

A pointer holds the address of another object. We get the address of an object
by using `&` address-of operator.

```cpp
int ival = 1;
int *p = &ival;     // p now holds the address of ival; p is pointer to ival
```

The second statement in above code is what defines `p` as a pointer to int and
initialized `p` to point to the `int` object `ival`. Because references are not
objects, they don't have adresses - hence, there is not such thing as pointer
to reference.

```cpp
double dval;
double *pd = &dval;     // allowed; initializer is the address of a double
double *pd2 = pd;       // allowed; initializer is a pointer to double
int *pi = pd;           // error; type mismatch
pi = &dval;             // error; type mismatch
```

**Pointer Value**

The value stored within a pointer can be in one of four states:

1. It can point to an object.
2. It can point to the location just past the end of an object.
3. It can be a null pointer; not bound to any object.
4. It can be invalid; values other than the preceding three are invalid.

**Using Pointer to Access an Object**

When a pointer points to an object, we can use dereference operator `*`:

```cpp
int ival = 7;
int *p = &ival;     // p holds the address of ival; p is a pointer to ival
cout << *p;         // prints object which p points at; prints 7

*p = 0;             // we assign new value 0 to ival through p
cout << &p          // prints 0
```

Dereference is only possible for valid pointer that points to an object.

It can be confusing that symbols have multiple meanings:

```cpp
int i = 1;
int &r = i;     // r is a reference; & is a declaration of reference

int *p;         // p is a pointer; * is a declaration of pointer

p = &i;         // & is used as address-of operator
*p = i;         // * is used as dereference operator
int &r2 = *p;   // & is a declaration of reference and * is a dereference operator
```

**Null Pointers**

A *null pointer* does not point to any object. To obtain null pointer:

```cpp
int *p1 = nullptr;      // same as int *p1 = 0;
int *p2 = 0;            // directly initalizes p2 from literal constant 0
int *p3 = NULL;
```

`nullptr` is a literal that is introduced as a part of new standard. It is
a special type that can be converted into any other type.

Old programs relied on *preprocessor variable* named `NULL` which `cstdlib`
header defined as 0. In modern C++ programming, we should avoid using `NULL` in
place of `nullptr`.

Note that it is illegal to assign an `int` to a pointer even if it is 0.

```cpp
int zero = 0;
pi = zero;          // error; cannot assign an int to a pointer
```

**Assignment and Pointers**

Both pointers and references give indirect access to other objects. However,
there are important differences in how they do so. The most important is that
a reference is NOT an object. Once we have defined a reference, there is no way
to make that reference refer to another object.

There is no such identity between a pointer and the address that it holds.

```cpp
int i = 1;
int *pi = 0;        // pi is initalized but addresses no object yet
int *pi2 = &i;      // pi2 is initalized to hold address of i
int *pi3;           // pi3 is uninitalized
pi3 = pi2;          // pi3 and pi2 address the same object i
pi2 = 0;            // pi2 holds no address of any object
```

Note the difference in following:

```cpp
pi = &ival;     // value within the pi is changed; pi points to ival
*pi = 0;        // value in ival is changed; pi however remains unchanged
```

**Other Pointer Operations**

So long as the pointer holds a valid value, we an use a pointer as a condition:

```cpp
int ival = 1;
int *pi = 0;        // pi is a valid, null pointer
int *pi2 = &ival;   // pi2 holds adress of ival

if (pi) {
    // does not execute
    // pi is 0; evals to False
}

if (pi2) {
    // does execute this block
    // pi2 is non-zero; evals to True
}
```

**`void*` Pointers**

The type `void*` is a special pointer type that can hold address of **any**
object. Like any other pointer, `void*` pointer holds an address but the type
of the object at this location will be unknown:

```cpp
double dval = 3.14, *pd = &dval;

//allowed; void* can hold address of any other data pointer type
void *pv = &dval;       
pv = pd;
```

There are only few things we can do with `void*` pointer:

1. Compare to another pointer.
2. Pass to, or return from a function.
3. Assign to another `void*` pointer.

We cannot use a `void*` to operate on the object it addresses as the type is
unknown.

General use of `void*` is to treat memory as a memory - rather than using the
pointer to access the object stored in that memory.

### 2.3.3 Understanding Compound Type Declarations

```cpp
int i = 1, *p = &i, &r = i;

int* p;     // misleading;

int* p1, p2;    // p1 is a pointer to int; p2 is an int!

int *p1, *p2;   // both p1 and p2 are pointers to int
```

**Pointers to Pointers**

There are no limits on how mnay type modifers can be applied to declarator.
Each pointer level is indicated by its own `*`:

```cpp
int ival = 1;
int *pi = &ival;
int **ppi = &pi;        // ppi points to a pointer to an int
```

Visually, `ppi` holds the address of `pi` where `pi` holds the address to
memory location where `ival` value of 1 resides.

**Reference to Pointers**

Reference is not an object; so, point to reference is impossible. But reference
to pointer is possible as pointer is an object.

```cpp
int i = 1;
int *p;
int *&r = p;    // r is a reference to the pointer p
r = &i;         // r refers to a pointer; assigning &i to r makes p point to i
*r = -1;        // dereferencing r yields i; changes i to -1 from 1
```

Can be confusing, but remember to read the definition from right to left. The
symbol closest to the name of the variable is the one that has the most
immediate effect on the variable's type. Hence, in the case of `int *&r`, we
see that `&` is closest to `r` and it is a reference first. The `*` that
follows indicates that the type `r` refers to would be the pointer type; base
declaration of `int` completes that `r` is a reference to a pointer to an
`int`.

## 2.4 `const` Qualifier

A value can be declared once and can be gurantee'd to never change its value
throughout its lifecycle:

```cpp
const int BUF_SIZE = 1024;      // input buffer size

BUF_SIZE = 512;                 // error; cannot reassign and write to const object
```

Since the `const` object cannot be changed, it must be initalized.

```cpp
const int k;        // error; should be initalized
```

**`const` Objects Are Local to a File**

When a `const` object is initalized from a compile-time constant, the compiler
will replace uses of the variables with the corresponding value for
optimization - in above case, every `BUF_SIZE` will be replaced with value of
1024.

When a program is split into multiple files, every file that uses `const` must
have access to its initalizer - and to do so, the variable must be defined in
every file that wants to use the variable's values. So, `const` variables are
defined as local to the file. When we define a `const` with the same name in
multiple files, it is as if we had written definitions for separate variables
in each file.

Sometimes we have a `const` variable that we want to share across multiple
files but whose initializer is not a constant expression. In this case, we
don't want the compiler to generate a separate variable in each file. We want
the `const` object to behave like any other non-`const` variables. To do so, we
use keyword `extern`:

```cpp
// file_1.cpp   defines and initalizes a const that is accessible to other files
extern const int BUF_SIZE = fcn();

// file_1.h
extern const in BUF_SIZE;   // same BUF_SIZE as defined in file_1.cpp
```

Here, `file_1.cpp` defines and initializes `BUF_SIZE`. Since it is `const`, we
use `extern` so that we can use it in other files. Notice that declaration
within the `.h` file must also be `extern` - indicating that `BUF_SIZE` in not
local to this file and its definition lies elsewhere.

### 2.4.1 References to `const`

```cpp
const int ci = 1;
const int &r1 = ci;
r1 = 2;                 // error
int &r2 = ci;           // error; non const-reference to const object
```

### 2.4.2 Pointers and `const`

```cpp
const double pi = 3.14;
double *ptr = *pi;          // error; ptr is a plain pointer
const double *cptr = &pi;   // allowed; cptr is a const double pointer
*cptr = 9.9;                // error; cannot change const

double dval = 3.14;
cptr = &dval;               // allowed; but cannot change dval through cptr
```

### 2.4.3 Top-Level `const`

Pointer is an object that can point to a different object; so, we can talk
independetly about whether a pointer is `const` and whether the objects to
which it can point are `const`. **Top-Level** `const` refers to that the
pointer itself is `const` where as **Low-Level** `const` refers to that the
pointer points to a `const` object.

### 2.4.4 `constexpr` and Constant Expressions

A *constant expression* is an expression whose value cannot change and that can
be evaluated at compile time.

```cpp
const int max_files = 20;           // max_files is a constant expression
const int limit = max_files + 1;    // limit is a constant expression
int staff_size = 20;                // staff_size is not a constant expression
const int s = get_size();           // s is not a constant expression
```

Note that `staff_size` above is initalized with a literal, it is not constant
expression as it is not declared as `const int`.

**`const expr` Variables**

It can be difficult to determine that an initalizer is a constant expression.
we might define a `const` variable with an initalizer that we think is
a constant expression but turns out to be not the case.

We can ask compiler to verify that a variable is a constant expression by
declaring the variable in a `constexpr` declaration.

```cpp
constexpr int mf = 20;          // 20 is a constant expression
constexpr int lim = mf + 1;     // mf + 1 is a constant expression
constexpr int s = size();       // allowed if size() is a conexpr function
```

## 2.5 Dealing with Types

### 2.5.1 Type Aliases

A *type alias* is a name that is a synonym for another type; it allows use to
simplify complicated type definitions and traditionally was done with
`typedef`:

```cpp
typedef double wages;           // wages is a synonym for double
typedef wages base, *p;         // base is a synonym for double, p for double *
```

New standard has a new way to make alias declaration:

```cpp
using SI = SalesItem;           // SI is a synonym for SalesItem

wages hourly, weekly;           // same as double hourly, weekly
SI item;                        // same as salesItem item

typedef char *pstring;
const pstring cstr = 0;         // cstr is a constant pointer to char
const pstring *ps;              // ps is a pointer to a constant pointer to char
```

### 2.5.2 The `auto` Type Specifier

Under new standard, we can let the compiler figure out the type for us by using
`auto` type specifier.

```cpp
auto result = val1 + val2;    // result initialized to sum of val1 and val2
```

In this example, the compiler will deduce the type of `result` by looking at
the return type of applying `+` to `val1` and `val2`. For example, if the
variables were double, `result` will also be double and so on.

**Compound Types, `const` and `auto`**

The type that compiler infers for `auto` is not always exactly the same as the
initializer's type; the compiler will conform to normal initialization rules:

```cpp
int i = 0, &r = i;
auto a = r;             // a is an int as r is an alias for i (of type int)
```

Also, `auto` will ignore top-level `const`s:

```cpp
const int ci = i, &cr = ci;

auto b = ci;            // b is int (top-level const in ci is dropped)
auto c = cr;            // c is int
auto d = &i;            // d is int* (address-of an int object is a pointer to int)
auto e = &ci;           // e is const int*

// by explicitly specifiying const, we maintain top-level const
const auto f = ci;      // f is const int
```

